Perl 5 Porters Weekly: September 3-September 9, 2012
====================================================

Welcome again to Perl 5 Porters Weekly, a summary of the email traffic on
the perl5-porters email list. Are you tired of talking and thinking about
smartmatch?  P5P was dominated this week by talk of named prototypes
(again.) 

Since the named prototypes discussion had so many responses, they'll be
put at the end of the summary.  I also decided this week to start a 
"dusty" thread feature - some issue that's been raised on p5p but 
without any subsequent response on the public list traffic. 

This week's dusty thread is [proposed/drafted new perl docs][1] which
were part of the p5p summary in July. These docs cover metadoc, perlblurb,
perladvantages, and perlresources.  They're intended for newbies and
language marketing purposes. You can find the docs in this [git repo][2].
If you're interested in working on them, contact [Uri Guttman][3].

Topics this week include:

    * Swapping SV bodies between two SV heads
    * UTF-8 just turned 20 years old
    * optimising JRuby by avoiding hashes
    * :utf8 status
    * Lexical subs are ready
    * Named prototypes (again)

**Swapping SV bodies between two SV heads**
Yves Orton posted an interesting question where he needed to compile a
regex into a specific empty SV but the API does not support supplying
the SV the regex will be compiled into. He developed some code to
swap the bodies of two SV heads and wanted a sanity check. Based on
list feedback he modified the code to leave the refcounts attached to
their original SV heads.

[Read the thread][4]

**UTF-8 just turned 20 years old**
Karl Williamson shared [Rob Pike's remembrance of the origin of UTF-8][5]
on the list. Quoting Rob Pike:

   The diner was the Corner Café in New Providence, New Jersey. We 
   just called it Mom's, to honor the previous proprietor. I don't 
   know if it's still the same, but we went there for dinner often, 
   it being the closest place to the Murray Hill offices. Being a proper 
   diner, it had paper placemats, and it was on one of those placemats 
   that Ken sketched out the bit-packing for UTF-8. It was so easy once 
   we saw it that there was no reason to keep the placemat for notes, and 
   we left it behind. Or maybe we did bring it back to the lab; I'm not 
   sure. But it's gone now. 

   I'll always regret that.

**optimising JRuby by avoiding hashes**
Nicholas Clark writes that an article on speeding up JRuby used the
technique of avoiding hash lookups in hot code paths, such as for method
dispatch.  Nicholas says that much of the infrastructure for doing something
like this in Perl already exists (method caching, ISA caching) and wondered
if this was a task someone wanted to work on.  He later wrote he had
experimentally implemented a suggestion of Chip Salzenburg's along these
lines but that (in tl;dr summary):

    [I]t's interesting and frustrating that it seems that (at least) 
    a simple implementation of Chip's suggestion turns out not to be 
    any sort of win.
    
[Read the thread][6]

**:utf8 status**
Leon Timmermans updates progress on a new :utf8 PerlIO layer he is writing
with Christian Hansen. The current layer is just a flag that Perl should
assume the bytestream is valid utf8 but doesn't actually check if that is
true, or enforce that restriction. 

It seems like this is very close to being finished but blocked by two bugs.
The first is that the the :bytes layer is broken too. But Leon has a patch
for that.  The second bug is that :stdio + any other layer hangs. Leon would
like to drop :stdio but there is code which depends on it in buggy ways. A
fix would involve refactoring Perl's readline support into PerlIO (which
Leon points out would probably be a good thing anyway overall.)

He finishes his email:

    As usual, this whole thing turns out to be much more complicated 
    than it should have been :-/

[Read the thread][7]

**Lexical subs are ready**
Father Chrysostomos wrote that a branch with an implementation of lexical
subs is now available for people to play around with. BTW, what is a lexical
sub? It's a subroutine that has a scope defined by its current block.

    {
        my sub bar { say "hoge" };

        bar();
    }

    # can't call bar() here; doesn't exist

FC says you can even redefine lexical subs at runtime using `eval` as in

    my sub foo { ... }

    eval 'my sub foo {' .$stuff. '}';

Seriously cool stuff that should be in blead soon and may make it into 5.18!
The big debate at the moment is how to enable this forward compatibily while
still keeping it an "experimental" feature that might be removed or modified
in the future. It sounds like there is going to be some kind of pragma
to explicitly activate it above and beyond the `use 5.018` version pragma
bundle.

[Read the thread][8]

**Named prototypes (again)**
At the end of [June][9] I noted in one of my earliest summaries that [Peter
Martini had volunteered][10] to implement code that allowed named arguments
to appear as part of a subroutine prototype, as in

    sub foo($a, $b, $c) {
        ...;
    }

This week posted an update on his progress with this effort. And then all 
hell broke loose. (Smartmatch? What smartmatch?) Here is what Peter wrote:

    What I'd proposed, and mostly implemented so far, is:

    1. When parsing a prototype, if an alphanumeric is detected, restart 
       the parsing as a list of named parameters.

    2. The named parameter list would be what the various modules seem 
       to have converged on:
         a comma separated list of [qualifier list] [white space] 
         [sigil] [name], eg 
        
         my $a, my $b, my $c

         And if no qualifier is specified, assume 'my'

    3. The last parameter can be greedy, @ or %; otherwise everything 
       must start with $

       A % would die if an odd number of parameters are listed to 
       construct it

    4. All parameters are optional, and will be declared but undefined 
       if not passed in.

    5. (The syntax would means in the future we could allow 
         my $var = 5, 
       to set a default, but that's a can of worms I don't want to think 
       about now)

    6. An additional sub attribute, proto, which can be used to specify 
       the traditional proto definition:

         sub something(my $a, my $b, my $c) : proto($$$) { }

    7. @_ would not be modified in anyway, so $_[0] accesses or even 
       my ($a2, $b2, $c2) = @_ would still work, if someone wanted to.

    Anyway, in the simplest (and I think default) case of 
    sub ($a, $b, $c) { }, this would be exactly equivalent to the 
    sub { my ($a, $b, $c) = @_; } case mentioned, independent of any 
    additions to the optimizer or re-writing ops - everything would be 
    handled by a flag on the CV and assignment in pp_entersub
    
Steffen Mueller really wanted to see something like this in Perl for a
long time. He even proposed it a while ago and it got derailed. But 
he wrote he saw 3 possible ways to interpret `sub f($a, $b, $c)`:

    rw aliasing: Makes those named parameters just a different way of 
    writing $_[$index]. This rw aliasing would mean that we entirely cut 
    away the overhead of ($a, $b, $c) = @_ copying. Nice! But it would 
    probably mean that people shoot themselves in the foot all the time, so 
    I heavy-heartedly discount this optimization opportunity.

    ro aliasing: Requires binds. Did Chip's bind patch ever make it in? In 
    theory, ro aliases should be well optimizable. In practice, I'm not sure 
    how I'd do that. Seems the safest option to me, since its also a very 
    common way to use your function parameters. How does this combine with 
    defaults, though?

    copying: Least surprise. Potentially least optimizable down the road.
    
Later Reini Urban wrote (among other things in tone that aren't worth
echoing here) that p5p should adopt Perl 6 syntax and style because 
they're "Larry decisions" which are much better than p5p decisions. 

Ricardo Signes wrote back that:

    Perl 6 is not Perl 5.  It's just another language that's out there that
    happens to look a lot like Perl 5.  Like Awk.  It has some really cool
    ideas that we should look at and figure out whether we can learn from
    them and build our own features into Perl 5 that steal from them, but we
    should actually design them to make sense in *our* language.  I mean,
    Rob Pike is a really smart guy, but we don't want to blindly steal bits
    of Go and drop them in Perl 5.

    Working comprehensively through design ramification of language changes
    can take time and be both frustrating and tiring, but *that's* what we
    have to do if we want to avoid mistakes.  We *don't* need to (nor should
    we) simply import designs from another language wholesale.
    
Nicholas Clark added:

    We *can't* blindly pick and choose parts of the Perl 6 design and bring
    them back verbatim. Because the Perl 6 deign is a whole, diverged from
    Perl 5.  Not a menu of "Perl 5"++ features that can be adopted
    independently.

    Larry's overriding design decision for Perl 6 seems to be "I can't fix
    this in Perl 5".

Back to the technical discussion, Vincent Pit wrote 

    To make this more clear : I see no value in

        sub foo ($x, $y) {
            ...
        }

    being equivalent to

        sub foo {
            my ($x, $y) = @_;
            ...
        }

    That adds literally zero to Perl : if I want these semantics, I can 
    write the assignment myself. A couple of saved keystrokes won't be 
    enough to make me add a hard dependency on a newer version of perl. But 
    making it default to read-*write* aliases (there :) actually makes that 
    syntax useful.

There were several responses to this, but they came after September 9. (If
you like to read ahead, feel free to find out what they say!)

[Read the thread][11]

 [1]: http://byte-me.org/perl-5-porters-weekly-july-23-july-29-2012/#2
 [2]: http://git.shadowcat.co.uk/gitweb/gitweb.cgi?p=urisagit/Perl-Docs.git;a=tree
 [3]: mailto:uri@perlhunter.com
 [4]: http://www.nntp.perl.org/group/perl.perl5.porters/2012/09/msg191582.html
 [5]: https://plus.google.com/u/0/101960720994009339267/posts/Rz1udTvtiMg
 [6]: http://www.nntp.perl.org/group/perl.perl5.porters/2012/09/msg191697.html
 [7]: http://www.nntp.perl.org/group/perl.perl5.porters/2012/09/msg191702.html
 [8]: http://www.nntp.perl.org/group/perl.perl5.porters/2012/09/msg191818.html
 [9]: http://byte-me.org/perl5-porters-weekly-june-25-july-1-2012/
[10]: http://www.nntp.perl.org/group/perl.perl5.porters/2012/06/msg188869.html
[11]: http://www.nntp.perl.org/group/perl.perl5.porters/2012/09/msg191477.html
