Perl 5 Porters Weekly: October 29-November 4, 2012
==================================================

Welcome to Perl 5 Porters Weekly, a summary of the email traffic of the
perl5-porters email list. 

This week's topics are:

* perl-5.16.2 is now available
* perl-5.12.5 RC1 is now available
* What happened to the whole "small core" idea?
* Eliminating the "rehash" mechanism for 5.18
* benchmarking Murmurhash3 vs One-At-A-Time as perl's hash function

**perl-5.16.2 is now available**

Ricardo Signes announced that perl 5.16.2 is now available on a CPAN mirror
near you. 

[Read the announcement][1]

[Read what's new][2]

[Download the tarball][3]

**perl-5.12.5 RC1 is now available**

Dominic Hargreaves announced that perl 5.12.5-RC1 is now available on a CPAN
mirror near you.

[Read the announcement][4]

**What happened to the whole "small core" idea**

[Last time][5], Peter Rabbitson asked what had happened to the idea of making
Perl's core smaller.  Ricardo Signes, the project's arbiter of taste,
finally replied this week. I encourage you to "read the whole thing" as all
the cool kids say these days, but here are some good excerpts:

    Later on in this thread, you say something like, "people are talking about
    getting [subroutine signatures] into 5.18."  I never thought this was
    seriously considered.  That is, I thought maybe some were hoping to see
    it become an experimental feature, but not anything we'd be stuck with
    once we proved it stank.

    ...but really, I didn't think it was even going to get that far.  But did
    it have to become a discussion about that?  I didn't think so.  There were two
    important things to figure out:  (a) how can we get perl equipped with hooks
    for signature systems that share a common underpining so we can figure out what
    a good "core" one might be and (b) what might that core one be?

    (a) would be nice to see, at least experimentally in 5.18

    (b) seems like it will be an ongoing discussion; why not have some of it on
    p5p?  and if there's an implementation that is built in a branch, without the
    benefit of the hooks suggested by 'a' that lets us play with the things as
    discussed... awesome!

    [...]

    As you noted, the bikeshedding is largely about design decisions that have
    *not* been proved on CPAN or become a standard.  This is a warning sign that
    it's maybe not baked enough.  I don't think that means that we should stop
    talking about it, or stop building on the code that implements it.  That
    currently-in-a-branch-of-perl code seems pretty good, and may very well be the
    code that does evolve into something proven enough to become the beloved
    reference implementation of signatures.  After all, it's from that code that
    the signature-adding APIs will probably be born, right?

[Read the whole thing][6]

**Eliminating the "rehash" mechanism for 5.18**

Yves Orton proposed eliminating perl's defensive mechanism against
pathological hash insertion attacks and replacing it with a per-run random
hash seed.  He explains:

    Choose a random hash seed at process start up as it effectively prevents
    the attacker from constructing their colliding keys remotely.  However
    it also means that the order in which a set of keys are stored in a hash
    becomes random.

    [...]

    Besides the advantages of avoiding the costs of the rehash mechanism
    this change will smoke out any hash order dependency bugs in the
    modules on CPAN, and in our own code. (I found at least two unrelated
    bugs in code in core due to hash randomization.) It will also prepare
    the ground for people to choose alternative hash algorithms for Perl
    to use, or to make it possible to use specialized hash algorithms in
    certain contexts such as 64 bit builds.

    The downside however will be that it almost certainly will make lots
    of lazily written code to fail. But IMO the cost is worth it.

Most people thought this was a good idea, but some thought there were
additional security precautions which should be considered.

[Read the thread][7]
    
**benchmarking Murmurhash3 vs One-At-A-Time as perl's hash function**    

Yves Orton had another interesting hash related email this week. He'd
written earlier in the summer that he was looking at replacing perl's hash
algorithm with one that could offer some signficant performance benefits
especially with longer keys.  This week he reported the results:

    Conclusion: on my laptop Murmurhash3 is more than 3 times faster at
    hashing longer strings than one-at-a-time, and roughly the same for
    shorter strings.

[Read the post][8]

[1]: http://www.nntp.perl.org/group/perl.perl5.porters/2012/11/msg194915.html
[2]: https://metacpan.org/module/perldelta
[3]: http://cpan.metacpan.org/authors/id/R/RJ/RJBS/perl-5.16.2.tar.bz2
[4]: http://www.nntp.perl.org/group/perl.perl5.porters/2012/11/msg194981.html
[5]: http://byte-me.org/perl-5-porters-weekly-october-22-october-28-2012/
[6]: http://www.nntp.perl.org/group/perl.perl5.porters/2012/10/msg194832.html
[7]: http://www.nntp.perl.org/group/perl.perl5.porters/2012/10/msg194813.html
[8]: http://www.nntp.perl.org/group/perl.perl5.porters/2012/10/msg194877.html
