Perl 5 Porters Weekly: August 27-September 2, 2012
==================================================

Welcome to Perl 5 Porters Weekly, a summary of the email traffic on the perl5-porters email list.
The smartmatch discussion continues to be very popular, so its summary will go at the end
of this post. There was also a very long, very tedious thread about how Perl ought to handle 
UTF-8 output which almost demonstrated [Godwin's Law](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Godwin's_law) 
(the longer a thread continues, the higher the liklihood someone will call someone else a Nazi.)

If you're reading this on my [blog](http://byte-me.org) or somewhere else on the web, you
can now find the summaries in Markdown format in 
[this github repository](https://github.com/mrallen1/P5P-Weekly).

Also, since there seems to be influx of new readers, ohai! I started writing these summaries
after YAPC::NA 2012 after having a breakfast conversation with Gabor Szabo. If you don't already
read his [Perl Weekly](http://www.perlweekly.com) email newsletter, you really ought to sign 
up for it.

Topics this week include:
* [Term::ReadLine::Perl not moving forward](#1) 
* [DTrace probes for loading-file, loaded-file, op-entry](#2)
* [My Perl Foundation Grant for Improving the Perl Debugger Was Accepted](#3)
* [utf8 problems (still, )](#4)
* [fixing smartmatch (again (still))](#5)

**<a id="1">Term::ReadLine::Perl not moving forward</a>**<br>
Rocky Bernstein posted a note that his patch to modernise parts of Term::ReadLine::Perl
haven't been acknowleged yet.  The patch add GNU Readline's ReadHistory, WriteHistory,
and StifleHistory. PAUSE admin Steffen Mueller suggested Rocky try to acquire comaintainer
status for this distribution.

[Read the thread](http://www.nntp.perl.org/group/perl.perl5.porters/2012/08/msg191117.html)

**<a id="2">DTrace probes for loading-file, loaded-file, op-entry</a>**<br>
Shawn Moore (aka Sartak) submitted a patch to extend DTrace coverage to loading-file,
loading-file during `require`, `use`, and `do`, and another patch traces each opcode
excution. DTrace is an amazing tool to have in your toolbox and it's great to see this
work get merged in blead. While DTrace is usually considered a Solaris technology, it's
also available in FreeBSD and Mac OS X, so if it's available on your platform, it's worth
learning.  An easy way to get started with DTrace and Perl is to check out the perldtrace
docs Perl ships.

[Read the message](http://www.nntp.perl.org/group/perl.perl5.porters/2012/08/msg191204.html)

[Read perldtrace](http://perldoc.perl.org/perldtrace.html)

**<a id="3">My Perl Foundation Grant for Improving the Perl Debugger Was Accepted</a>**<br>
Shlomi Fish wrote that his grant proposal to improve the perl debugger was accepted
by the Perl Foundation. Later there was some back and forth from Rocky Bernstein and Shlomi
about incorporating some of the work that Rocky is doing with his own debugger tools
called [Devel::Trepan](https://metacpan.org/module/Devel::Trepan). 

[Read the thread](http://www.nntp.perl.org/group/perl.perl5.porters/2012/08/msg191310.html)

**<a id="4">utf problems (still, )</a>**<br>
Linda W reported that a UTF-8 character in her Perl source was rendered incorrectly in 
a debug session. She proposed that in some future version of Perl 5.x STDOUT get a
default encoding layer. The thread then proceeded for about 30+ messages with
various people attempting to explain what was happening and why Perl STDOUT won't
get a default encoding layer. Ricardo finally posted

    Nobody really minds explaining why stupid things are stuck being stupid.  It's
    very tiring to see you repeatedly harangue the very people who try to give an
    explanation.

    [...]

    Please stop calling people trolls, despots, or deluded.  It doesn't accomplish
    anything but make the idea of trying to respond to your reports less palatable.

I thought that might end the thread but like a shambling zombie, it just keeps going. 
Normally, I'd ignore a thread like this, but it was up over 50 replies in the course 
of the week. That's 45 minutes of my life I'll never get back and now it's 20 seconds
of yours. Mazel tov!

**<a id="5">fixing smartmatch (again (still))</a>**<br>
[Last week](http://byte-me.org/perl-5-porters-weekly-august-20-august-26-2012#6) I
promised I'd detail Ricardo's response to a proposal to deprecate smartmatch and 
wrap a thin layer of syntactic sugar around the `when` construct.  Here's what he wrote 
(sorry, there's no tl;dr version, it's already pretty dense):

    ## The New ~~ Operator

    $a      $b                  Meaning
    ======= =======             ======================
    Any     undef               ! defined $a
    Any     ~~-overloaded       ~~ overloading is used
    Any     Regexp, qr-ol       $a =~ $b
    Any     CodeRef, &{}-ol     $b->($a)
    Any     Any                 fatal

    So, this is the table I proposed in July 2011, and it's what I think we're back
    to.  No special cases.

    There is no question of how ($x=5) somehow became ambiguous, because if $x
    contains 5 or "5" is is not allowed as the smartmatcher operator, period.  Use
    Smart::Match and say stringwise(5) or numwise(5), or pass sub{$_==5}

    If both 'qr' and '&{}' are overloaded, '~~' must be overloaded to disambiguate.

    Switches are still okay.

    ## The new behavior of given/when

    given ($x) {
        when ($y)  { ... } # $x ~~ $y
        when (4)   { ... } # $x == 4
        when ('4') { ... } # $x eq 4
    }

    Deferred/computed values of any sort mean smart match.

    Two dead-simple special cases: Numeric literals mean ==.  String literals mean
    eq.

    If you want one case for $x eq a or b or c, then:

    given ($x) {
        when (stringwise any qw(a b c)) { ... }
    }

    ## What about what Father C. said?

    Sprout proposed that smartmarch be jettisoned and that `when` always evaluate
    its parameter as a boolean expression, save for the same simple cases above.

    For the "$x eq a or b or c" example, that gives us at least two simple choices:

    given ($x) {
        # Here, "any" returns a "junction" that distributes the eq
        when ($_ eq any qw(a b c)) { ... }
    }

    Or:

    given ($x) {
        # Here, stringwise implies the "$_ eq"
        when (stringwise any qw(a b c)) { ... }
    }

    My thoughts on this are:

    * I like the idea that we can have matcher objects that can be passed in
    more succinctly than a sub.  ->set_matcher(qr/../) or ->set_matcher($obj)
    both seems simpler to me than ->set_matcher(sub { /.../ }) or
    ->set_matcher(sub { $obj->match($_) })

    * If we do, then Smart::Match and many other things keep working as they have
    without needing to be rewritten.  This is nice.

    As Father Chrysostomos suggests, perl does not *need* smartmatch.  Really, it
    doesn't need need features.  My question is, does perl benefit more from this
    fix to smartmatching than it does from simply removing it?  I believe it does.

Most people seem to be satisfied with this response. Rik later expanded on some code 
examples in [another message](http://www.nntp.perl.org/group/perl.perl5.porters/2012/08/msg191418.html)

    The exhaustive set of "when" behaviors would be:

    given ($input) {
        when (1)   { ... } # if $input == 1
        when ('x') { ... } # if $input eq 'x'
        when ($x)  { ... } # if $input ~~ $x
    }

    And further demonstrated:

    given ($input) {
        when (undef)  { ... } # if $input ~~ undef
        when ($x + 2) { ... } # if $input ~~ ($x + 2)
        when ($_ > 1) { ... } # if $input ~~ ($_ > 1)
    }

    Under FC's proposal, which would eliminate ~~ entirely:

    given ($input) {
        when (1)   { ... } # if $input == 1
        when ('x') { ... } # if $input eq 'x'
        when ($x)  { ... } # if $x
        when (undef)  { ... } # if undef
        when ($x + 2) { ... } # if ($x+2)
        when ($_ > 1) { ... } # if ($_ > 1)
    }

And the smartmatch discussions carry over into September. See you next week.

[Read the thread](http://www.nntp.perl.org/group/perl.perl5.porters/2012/08/msg191210.html)
